[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Compton
Rom has made his life's work
the understanding
of the tiniest,
but incredibly potent
species on Earth--
microbes.
Where our medical understanding
was to simply kill them,
Compton shows us the
profound healing capabilities
of these tiny
creatures that make up
most of our body's mass.
And I think most
people are like, eww,
what do you mean microbes
make up most of our mass?
And that's when you get
into that shocking one-liner
about, what is it?
>>COMPTON ROM: Microbes are
the majority of the human body.
In fact, 90% of all the
living cells in the human body
are not human, they're microbes,
which include parasites,
includes viruses, but mostly
bacteria and protozoa.
>>REGINA: And that's
hard for most people
to get their minds around is
that how can we look like this,
but actually be made up
of something non-human
essentially.
>>ROM: Right.
Well, in my mind,
we're taught to think
that we're the only important
ones on this earth, when we're
actually a super organism.
So we don't occupy this
ecological space called
the human body
alone, we occupy it
with many different entities,
many different organisms.
>>REGINA: Billions and
billions of little entities.
>>ROM: Trillions, yeah.
>>REGINA: Trillions of
entities that make up us.
>>ROM: Over 100 trillion cells
live in this human ecology,
and less than 10%
are human cells.
90% are non-human cells.
>>REGINA: Isn't that crazy
when you think about it?
But you know this
because this has been
your passion and life's work.
And we've talked
about microbes before,
and we kind of go deeper each
time into the conversation.
And we have a few
different areas
that I think most people are not
aware of we can get in today,
but first, let's talk about kind
of the synergistic relationship
between microbes
and the human cells
and how we keep our
health together.
But we're going to
go into something--
it's a word I've never heard
before actually until today--
called micro hormesis.
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, so
we'll end up there
before we go anywhere
else in the conversation.
So just launch in
and tell us how
this works, because
we are going to put
to bed a couple of
myths, and one of them
has to do with consumption of
Vitamin C in large amounts.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: So launch in.
>>ROM: Well, my
studies in microbes
has been going on for
about 20 years now.
In fact, 30 years since
I was in graduate school,
but I started picking
it up about 20 years ago
when the first studies
of what was then called
the human metabolome came out.
And the metabolome was all about
looking at the metabolites that
are produced in the urine.
And when they found out that
these metabolites were not
human in nature,
they were actually
coming from microbes
in their gut,
is when scientists
started to figure out
that the metabolites that
are created in the urine
are actually
created by microbes,
so let's call it the microbiome.
And they started
mapping out and seeing
the importance of all
the different microbes
in the human gut.
Because from these
metabolic studies,
and it was pioneered by Jeremy
Nicholson out of Cambridge
University, he found out that
just by looking at your pee,
he can find out where you live,
how long you're going to live,
and what you're eating.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: Right?
>>REGINA: I have a little book,
"What's My Pee Telling Me?"
and its companion book,
"What's Your Poo Telling You?"
>>ROM: Exactly, yeah.
>>REGINA: It goes into
some of this, yeah.
>>ROM: But our urine, it's
literally an ultra-filtrate
of what's going on in our body.
And a lot of people think,
yes, it's taking out
a lot of toxins, but the
things that we're building
inside our body in
response to what
the food that we're eating,
the different types of energies
that we're eating, our
bodies are responding
to these so-called stressors.
And this is where I
wanted to come in.
It's a concept called
micro hormesis.
So when we eat a
plant, the human cells
don't break down that plant.
It's actually the microbes
that actually break down
that plant matter.
And when that plant
matter happens
to be this natural biopesticide
that inhibits the bugs that
are eating that plant,
it's a small toxin
that appears in our
body, and the microbes
convert it into a way
that it tells our body
to become stronger.
It's a whole concept
called micro hormesis,
where we need our body
to build like a muscle.
Our immunity is like a muscle.
We need to build it.
>>REGINA: Well, just like
when you're working out,
if you want to build
muscle, you have
to have the little micro
tears in the muscle so they
can stress and then repair and
become stronger and stronger.
Same thing you're saying
with our immune system
and with our cellular
functioning in general?
>>ROM: Yeah.
And you don't want to exercise
too much because then you'll
macro tear the muscles.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: So everything's
in balance.
And when you talk to people
that are longevity experts,
they are always talking about
holding everything in just
the right kind of balance.
>>REGINA: And we tend
to think more is better.
I mean, that's really been a
big part of the self-help trend
in health over the last 30, 40
years is your doctors weren't
telling you what
nutrients you needed,
so you had to go
to other sources.
Some of them may have been MDs,
others nutritionists, others
just product developers.
And everyone says their product
is the one essential thing you
need, and we have
been so confused,
overwhelmed, even
unintentionally misled
to where we're overconsuming
all these things.
And to what extent
have we actually
started throwing
ourselves out of balance
trying to find this wonderful
state of homeostasis
with our health?
>>ROM: Right.
It's like playing
roulette, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: Yeah.
First, going to the
right doctor and finding
the right
pharmaceutical medicine,
and now it's finding the
right nutritional supplements.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>ROM: Even me, I have
a whole basket case
of nutritional supplements.
>>REGINA: Well, I think everyone
watching this does pretty much,
myself included.
And it's like,
yikes, the human body
used to be able to go on just
fine without all this stuff,
so what do we actually need?
>>ROM: Right.
So there is a new
field of science
that I'm calling the
bio-intelligent field science,
bio-intelligent field theory,
and it comes from the fact
that we need to think that
our body is a super organism
and that it's
self-directed and it's
got self-programming to heal.
Believe it or not, our
bodies are always healing.
No matter what
you try to do, you
can't stop your
body from healing.
But we don't seem to--
>>REGINA: That's
its prime directive.
>>ROM: Exactly, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: But it gets
these prime directives
from many different
forms of energy.
And people think that
the only way that we
get energy in our
body is through food,
and that's just simply not true.
>>REGINA: I mean,
really, Compton,
isn't the food,
the quality of food
we're eating now
more devitalizing
than healing for the most part?
>>ROM: It is, and it started
with the Green Revolution.
And the Green--
>>REGINA: Talk about that.
>>ROM: Well, I wanted to talk
about how where we are now,
how we got to where
we are now isn't going
to get to where we want to go.
>>REGINA: OK, go ahead.
>>ROM: Like in a train
station, we literally
have to hop off this train
and get on a new train track.
And like a flight plan, if
you're flying from New York
to Los Angeles, if that
flight is off just by 1%,
you'll end up in the
ocean by the time
you get to Los Angeles.
But you don't know that
the flight is off by 1%.
So by thinking that, oh, this
food isn't going to hurt us,
and yeah, we put a
little pesticides
and we put herbicides in there,
it's not going to hurt us,
it doesn't hurt us in the short
term, but in the medium term,
we start to feel something.
And in the long
term, we definitely
know that there's
something missing.
>>REGINA: So you said something
very intriguing a moment ago.
Where does the notion
of the Green Revolution
come into this?
>>ROM: The Green
Revolution started
during World War I, when German
scientists of a company that
is now known as
BASF figured out how
to make synthetic nitrogen to
put in bombs and in chemical
warfare.
And this nitrogen, instead
of harvesting nitrogen
from bat guano and whatnot
all over the world,
the British empire actually made
their money harvesting nitrogen
from natural caves
all around the world.
And when the Germans came in and
discovered how to make nitrogen
synthetically, they applied this
after World War I to the food.
And they said, oh, now
to support our burgeoning
population, we can create
this liquid form of nitrogen.
And so they applied the nitrogen
to the plants, and boom,
all these plants
started growing.
But what they didn't
realize is that just
by adding this excess
nitrogen, the plants
forgot how to make all
their other stuff that
keeps us alive and healthy.
Because they just
focused on growth, but
they didn't focus on nutrition.
And there's a difference
between growth and nutrition,
and that difference is in
the amount of information
that we're getting in our body.
So when we think
of nutrition, we
think of the energy
that's being created.
And when we look at food and
the food gets broken down
into its individual components
and the ultimate component
of all food, fats and
carbohydrates is glucose.
And when glucose gets broken
down, it gets broken down
and the mitochrondria seize it.
And ultimately, glucose is
just a form of electrons
and it's flowing,
and it gives us
the energy from which to move.
So when you look at the
energy that we're gaining,
you can look at the energy
as one of two things.
One is the energy as a flow
of electrons, and number two,
the energy has to have a
direction in which to go.
I mean, just imagine putting
gas in your car, which
is the electrons,
and then the GPS
doesn't tell you where to
go and you just go here
and you go there.
That's what's
happening to our food.
And worse yet, some of
the food that we take
are taking us over
a cliff, you know?
>>REGINA: Which
foods in particular?
>>ROM: Well, I wouldn't
call it a food,
but look at
methamphetamine, right?
It has a lot of energy,
a lot of electrons.
And boom, you think that this
is like the biggest high,
it's the biggest thing that
you can feel in the world,
but it just leads you to
a road of destruction.
So that is a very
obvious thing that we
put in our body that's giving us
the wrong kind of information.
>>REGINA: Methamphetamines?
But how is the average
person feeding themselves
methamphetamines?
>>ROM: They're not.
I'm just saying--
>>REGINA: Oh,
you're saying just--
OK, and that's an extreme.
>>ROM: That's an extreme--
>>REGINA: What about in our
ordinary kind of menu of food?
>>ROM: Let's look at fast food.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: OK.
So when they created
a McDonald's burger,
there was a study
done in 2003 that
showed that the actual
microbes inside a burger
were kind of like
franken microbes.
They actually mutated to
accommodate the kind of meat
that was created full of
antibiotics, hormones,
pesticides, and chemicals.
Because in order to grow
the plants using the Green
Revolution in mono
crop status, you
had to use a lot of
pesticides and herbicides
because they weren't growing
this in heterogeneous ecology
anymore.
It was all mono crops.
So they would give the cows
things that they weren't
supposed to eat, which is corn.
I mean, cows are meant to eat
grass, but they gave them corn.
And so they started
fattening up on corn,
and they weren't fat enough, so
they gave them more hormones.
And they weren't healthy
enough, so they gave them
a lot of antibiotics.
So the meat that you are getting
were filled with hormones,
they were filled
with antibiotics,
and they were filled with
pesticides and herbicides.
And when you get this into
fast foods, into a burger,
your body would react to it.
And the way your
body reacts to it
is by killing off the microbes
that were healthy for you,
and then the microbes that
were actually feeding off
of that became mutant microbes.
And over time, you
see these movies
like "Supersize Me," the
guy gained 50 pounds.
He was almost in dire
need of emergency help.
>>REGINA: He was.
And it wasn't just that he'd
taken in too many calories.
What happened was exponential.
It was beyond just excessive
caloric consumption,
the level of his health.
You can take in excess
calories of healthy foods,
and you're not going
to end up like that.
>>ROM: Because the difference
is in the information that's
encoded in the food.
So every time we
take supplements,
every time we take food, we
need to think two things.
Does it have energy, and
does it have information?
The combination of the energy
of going plus the information
that it has is what I call
bio-intelligent nutrition.
This is the intelligence
that we're eating.
And what I'm proposing is that
in our system of governance,
in our system of governance
of how we make our food,
how we make our products,
how we make our houses,
we have the
opportunity to encode
bio-intelligent information
in every step of the process.
For example, if we take out
the intelligence of the food
by adding herbicides
and pesticides,
we disconnect from
nature, right?
Our food is actually being
dumbed down and disconnected
from nature right at
the point of growth.
Then we take it to the
processing facility,
and then we add other
things to the food.
To our skin products,
we add parabens.
To the food, we add
things that kill off
our microbiome because they
want to preserve the food.
But it's for the
convenience of who?
Us?
No, it's for the convenience
of the company selling
the food so they can leave it
in the shelves a lot longer.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: Right?
So instead of putting the
natural antibiotics in there,
the metabolites
made by microbes,
you're putting
chemicals in there.
And slowly over time,
that information
that tells the human being
how to live a longer life,
basically longevity
information, gets cut off.
And so the human being is
left to fend for itself on how
to react to this thing, and
it usually reacts negatively,
and it reacts negatively
usually by the first thing
is by weight gain.
You know that there's also
another study that came out
that people in the 1980s,
they did this study of people
in the 1980s that
ate the same thing
and exercised the
exact same way,
and they did a study
of people in 2010.
People in 2010, gained
an average of 20,
they were 20 pounds
heavier than what you
would have done in the 1980s.
>>REGINA: Was it because of the
alteration of the food source,
that corruption--
>>ROM: Because of the
corruption of the food
source, the amount
of pharmaceuticals
that we are taking.
>>REGINA: What
about the notion--
because it is all just
information of all the EMFs
and so forth.
>>ROM: Yes, exactly.
This type of information
is very important.
There are healthy
EMFs, and there
are negative EMFs
that are important,
like the whole concept of pulse
electromagnetic frequencies now
and where they're pulsing
people with the right kind of--
>>REGINA: PEMF devices.
>>ROM: Yeah.
So I'm working
with a company now
that is trying to work
with me on putting PEMFs
in the microbes that we're
fermenting so that you can wear
a device that will activate the
actual probiotics in the foods
that we're creating.
So when I look at
creating our probiotics,
I look at basically five or six
different types of nutrition
that these microbes need.
And if the microbes
need these nutrition,
we need this kind of nutrition.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: They need nutrition
from food, number one,
but we also get nutrition
from light, right?
Believe it or not, infrared
light, when we get it,
fills us with electrons.
There's this renowned scientist
by name of Gerald Pollack,
and he has the concept called
"The Fourth Phase of Water,"
which is the water
inside of our cells
is completely different from
the water that we are drinking,
and that the water that we're
drinking, when it's combined
with infrared light,
the light changes
that water into a structured
water called hexagonal water.
It's a crystallized
form of water.
So water is three phases--
a gas, a liquid, and a solid.
But in the liquid
phase, there's actually
a solid phase called the
hexagonal crystal, which
he calls the fourth
phase of water,
and it gets converted when
we get infrared light.
>>REGINA: I know
a lot of devices
are on the market now featuring
infrared energy light,
but also there are some
that are combining near
and far red light together.
What is that?
What does the near light
do as opposed to the far?
>>ROM: Well, the
near light doesn't
penetrate as far as
the far infrared light,
but they're both good.
I mean, far infrared
light penetrates a lot
deeper into tissues
and the cells,
but we need a lot more research
on the type of information
that's going in there.
I don't care to
use war analogies,
but it's the difference
between sending
in light that's
equivalent to raw army
recruits versus sending
in light that's educated
and that's kind of like
special forces, right?
So you need less light
if that light is actually
encoded with information that
gives our body the blueprint
to live longer.
So the kind of information that
I'm talking about could be--
there's two kinds
of information.
When you go to
homeopathics and you
go to pharmaceutical
medicines, they're
usually information on how
to go against something, how
to stomp down.
Like you got this symptom,
OK, let's stomp it down.
You got this thing, let's put
a homeopathic antidote to it.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Yeah.
>>ROM: But back in the
1700s and the 1800s
when homeopathy
started, there weren't
that many chronic
diseases, so they
were able to stomp
down this and they
were able to stomp down that.
But now there's so many
things to stomp down,
we can't control it.
The field of bio-intelligent
field medicine,
bio-intelligent
field science, means
that if you can provide a
blueprint, because the body is
self-directed, if you can
provide the optimal blueprint
for that body to optimize
itself and you give it
that information
to optimize itself,
you don't have to worry
about the different symptoms.
>>REGINA: So how
does one determine
what the optimal blueprint is?
>>ROM: Oh, that's
a good question.
The way we're doing it is
by looking at urine studies.
So number one, the
optimal blueprint
is always coming in nature.
What I tend to feel is that we
can do a better job in science.
Our doctors, our scientists,
they're all brilliant,
but we can do a
better job thinking
that we're here because of
nature as opposed to we're
here against nature.
We're two sides of
the same coin, right?
We can't experience light unless
we've experienced darkness.
We can't experience love
until we've actually
experienced pain.
And so for us to
experience living and not
say that we're not here because
of the things that got us here
is completely wrong thinking,
and the types of information
that nature is giving us
we're totally blocking out.
And the earth has been here
for four billion years,
the universe has been here
for who knows how long,
and we're betting
against it, right?
If I was going to Vegas,
I would never ever
bet against the house.
>>REGINA: No.
Nature is going to do OK.
It's whether this species
and others are going to--
>>ROM: So why bet against it?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ROM: So find the
optimal intelligence
that nature is giving
us, encode that
in every step of the process
that we're making food,
that we're making supplements,
that we're making our products,
and the way we encode it is
by making sure that we've
got a connection to nature.
>>REGINA: OK, so you
started by saying that urine
is where you're starting.
So when we're talking about
individually tailoring
what stressors and what
sustenance our bodies,
our microbes and
cells are calling for,
how does that work?
What's that whole
chain look like?
>>ROM: OK, so our
urine is basically
our body's way of telling us
what's happening in our body
dynamically.
We can take our blood,
we can take our saliva,
but for me, there's a
lot of studies being
done on urine metabolites.
For example, let's
just take inflammation.
So there are these
urine metabolites--
C-reactive protein, NF
Kappa Beta protein--
and a lot of these
stressors that come out
when our inflammation
is really high,
it shows up immediately
in our urine.
So if you take something
and that C-reactive protein
goes down, you know
that what you're taking
has bio-intelligent information.
So for example, do you know that
there's a urine metabolite that
can determine whether or
not what you're taking
is effective in PTSD?
>>REGINA: No.
>>ROM: Yeah.
So this urine metabolite, one
of them is called cortisol.
And a lot of people know it,
but it's basically an effector
of our adrenal glands.
And every time we're
stressed-- people with PTSD
have high amounts of cortisol
always in their blood.
So you do therapies,
you do meditation,
that cortisol level goes down.
So the meditation itself,
which is usually sound therapy,
contains information
that's allowing the body
to lower its cortisol
levels, right?
So that's bio-intelligent
information.
So you have to work backwards,
kind of like a detective,
to say, what are these
metabolites in the urine?
And what are the ones that
are affecting our glucose
metabolism?
What are the ones affecting
our immunity status?
our inflammation status?
What are the ones that
are affecting our heart
cardiovascular status?
And then you find that you've
got microbial metabolites
lowering these things,
you've got plant metabolites
you've got electrical pulses
lowering these things,
you've got magnetic pulses
lowering these things, right?
And when they lower
things, you start
to point the body towards
an optimal direction.
So instead of figuring out
what the body has to tamp down,
let's keep focused on how
the body needs to go forward.
And anything going forward
means it's optimal wellness,
and to me, it's always
about longevity.
>>REGINA: So would you say that
en masse in Western culture
that we have sort of a
mass chronic inflammation?
>>ROM: Absolutely.
Inflammation is like
the number one thing
that's preventing us from
achieving optimal wellness
and longevity.
And the better we can tamp
down that inflammation,
the longer we're going to
live because inflammation
affects everything.
Inflammation in our
cardiovascular system
occludes the arteries.
Inflammation in
our immune system
is always triggering
our immune system.
It's everything and everywhere.
>>REGINA: OK, so now this
will get more complex
because each body is just, in
terms of its own information
system, so different,
but there have
to be some common points
between human beings.
So for example, you
have people, say,
if they're faced
with cancer, you
have people going on a vegan
diet to take care of cancer,
you have people going on
a bone broth diet, a Keto
diet, and all-juice diet.
Everyone's approaching it
from every different angle,
the same issue, and for a
good percentage of people,
that particular
one really works.
How do you deal with
internal inflammation?
How do we deal with this
inflammation in our bodies
en masse?
How do you know which
path to take for you?
Because this is the
most confusing thing
people are going through,
information overwhelm.
Oh, you have to do
Keto to make this work.
No, you have to be
vegan to make it work.
>>ROM: And how do you
know it's working?
>>REGINA: How do you
And how do you know
what's right for you?
>>ROM: So how do you
know anything is working?
How do you know anything
is right for you?
You know what they
call it in medicine?
It's called outcomes, and
managing your outcomes
is the key to all medication
and all pharmaceuticals.
So they look at these outcomes,
and usually these outcomes
are, in terms of inflammation,
what is your C-reactive protein
looking like and what
is your blood level
of these inflammation
markers looking like?
And in physiology, what
is your range of motion?
And in mental cognitive tests,
are you thinking better?
Those are markers for
lower inflammation.
And then you find
out what's causing
that lowering of inflammation.
And usually, if it's
something that's
actually specific
for inflammation,
it's going against inflammation.
But if you look at
something that's
allowing your body to
deal with inflammation
and using that
inflammation as a stressor,
it's what's called an optimal
blueprint inflammation.
>>REGINA: But how do you find
out what that thing is for you?
>>ROM: You would have
to test your urine,
you'd have to test your blood.
So what we're not doing
is, because we're not
getting paid for it by
a medical insurance,
we have to do urine tests,
urine metabolic testing
of our own types.
And this is something that we're
starting at Ascended Health,
to start a really affordable
testing panel down the road.
I mean, I've already
partnered with a testing lab
to figure out these
tests for inflammation,
for immunity, where you can
just actually send in your urine
and do a really
cheap test for it.
And then soon we'll have
dipsticks and things like that.
But metrics are the number
one way to figure out.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it makes sense.
>>ROM: Even different
vendors selling vitamin Cs,
you might be more
predicated to taking
one vitamin C versus
another vendor's vitamin C.
>>REGINA: I mean,
because we're going
to get into vitamin
C in a moment,
so we have many
different kinds, right?
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And, I
mean, whether it's
powdered calcium
ascorbate, Lypo-Spheric, I
mean, there are so many
different forms of vitamin C
available now.
And again, how do you
know which one is working
for you versus against you?
So let's talk about
vitamin C because that's
so ubiquitous in so
many people's diets.
>>ROM: Exactly.
So the only way we know is just
by our own innate feel, right?
But if we're really
going to know,
we have to take a quantitative
test on whether or not
that vitamin C is
actually lowering
your ROS, your Reactive
Oxygen Species, in your body.
So you can test for
reactive oxygen species,
and when you take
vitamin C, how does it
test for when you take your
urine five minutes, an hour,
and two hours after you take it?
I mean, it's expensive,
but that's really
the only way we
can do it, until we
come up with the technology
that can actually
have a marker in our
toilet and we just--
>>REGINA: Well, Michio
Kaku said that's coming.
>>ROM: It is coming.
>>REGINA: I think
it was 20 years ago
he said that's
coming in 50 years,
so maybe another 5,
10, 15, 20 years.
>>ROM: It's probably coming
in the next couple years.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>ROM: Yeah, it's
going to be a couple--
>>REGINA: I think that's
a great technology.
Just explain for people
who aren't aware of it
what this means.
I mean, it's really
pretty profound.
>>ROM: It's a
technology that we're
working on in my new company
called Longevican called
optimized bio-habitats,
or bio-tats, where you can
come in and live in a space
where that space is actively
going to dynamically
measure every single thing
of your body.
Your urine and your stool will
have sensors inside the urine
and stool, and that'll be
uploaded via USB port to say,
OK, these are the
metabolites that's going in.
>>REGINA: The information
is coming from your toilet?
>>ROM: It's coming
from your toilet,
but is going into the cloud.
It's being analyzed by AI,
saying that, OK, so now you're
optimized, we have to get
your information levels low.
And then you're going
to be able to see it
in your app to see what your
inflammation levels are.
But if you're trying to get
into ketoacidosis, for example,
so a lot of people
want to lose weight
and they're going
on this Keto diet,
well, you can measure the
ketoacidosis in your breath.
So we'll have sensors
in the ceilings
to measure your
oxygen utilization,
but also measure the
acetone levels in the air.
And that, again,
goes into the cloud,
saying that, OK, you're
not in ketoacidosis,
you must've ate
some sort of fruit
or some sort of
bread or something,
but you're not doing
that at the time.
So measurement is
the key to find out
whether something is going
on, not just by taking
someone's word for it.
And for these last
100 years, most people
have been satisfied giving their
power away to a third party
proxy saying that, oh, you
know how to take care of me,
please take care of me,
and we lose that muscle
to take care of ourselves.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ROM: Right?
So these stressors are good.
The stressor, by saying that
modern medicine isn't taking
care of us, is actually
a good stressor
because it's forcing people to
use our self-reliance muscle.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
No, I think that's fabulous.
>>ROM: We need to take
our power back and work
with the knowledge experts,
which are the doctors,
and work with them to evolve
our whole system of health care.
Everything is evolving.
Even humans are evolving.
Right now, by Darwin's theory
of evolution, the people that
can't handle all
the antibiotics, all
the pesticides and
herbicides, they're dying off.
And the ones that can
handle it, the ones
that are able to
adapt, we're going
to be the ones that are
having children in the future.
So 200, 300 years
from now, we're
going to be able to handle
all these levels of pesticides
and herbicides, but that's
200, 300 years from now.
>>REGINA: Right, the body
will ultimately adapt.
OK, so I know this is of concern
to a lot of people watching,
and we have a high proportion
of women watching this as well,
and that is the whole
notion you talked
about a moment ago talking
about ketogenics and weight loss
and so forth.
So let's take this from the
notion of chronic inflammation
in the body.
We already talked about the
McDonald's kind of phenomena.
So internal inflammation
are microbial metabolites
and our metabolism.
Do those things work
together and flow together?
>>ROM: Oh, absolutely.
>>REGINA: So can
you talk about what
that looks like so we understand
why we're putting on weight?
And very specifically, even
people who are relatively thin
have this kind of
pudgy belly weight
that we did not have
30, 40 years ago,
and these are
people who are thin.
So what's going on in
our diets and the lack
of correct information
that's creating
this chronic inflammation
that's leading to holding
excess weight on our bodies?
And how do we shift
those metabolites
to helping our metabolism
function better?
>>ROM: Right.
So the metabolites that
we're putting in our products
come from bacteria.
And in order for the
bacteria to produce
those type of metabolites with
the right kind of information
for our bodies to
lower inflammation,
I'm working on a product
called triple turmeric.
And we're doing five
different things
to create the types
of metabolites
that our body needs to get
that optimal blueprint.
Again, it's not about
lowering inflammation,
it's about getting the body to
attach to an optimal blueprint
to say, this is how I'm
going to heal myself.
The body's saying, I don't need
help lowering inflammation,
I just need help getting
pointed in the right direction.
Get me off of this train,
off of this train track,
get me on another
train track that's
going to be pointing me
to another direction.
>>REGINA: And
turmeric is obviously
a superfood when it comes to
reducing chronic inflammation.
>>ROM: It is, but turmeric
is not available in the body.
>>REGINA: No.
>>ROM: Only maybe 99% of
all the turmeric that one
eats in the body gets excreted,
unless it's fermented, right?
So what we've done is I've taken
microbes from longevity zones,
and for our particular microbe
in the triple turmeric product,
I've taken it from the Punjab
region, where people are really
skinny in the northern India.
And they also have
a very low incidence
of Parkinson's disease
and a low incidence
of any other
neurodegenerative disease
because their inflammation
in the brain is very low.
>>REGINA: And they
also have a high level
of turmeric in the diet.
>>ROM: In the
diet, but they also
have a high level of
particular bacteria
that grow on the turmeric there.
It's different from the
bacteria that grows on--
>>REGINA: So you have brought
that bacteria to your lab?
>>ROM: Yeah, so we
cultured that bacteria,
and we're starting to
break down this turmeric
into bacterial metabolites,
into different curcuminoids,
secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary curcuminoids,
and then we're packaging it.
But that's just the
food portion, right?
What people don't see, like
in our fermentation room,
we're creating magnetics.
I have a nine gauss field
underneath the fermentation
room, so we have
geodesic information,
magnetic information,
into the food.
And I'm also pulsing it
with electromagnetic pulsing
frequency that the
microbes like when they're
growing at their finest.
I mean, they're not doing this
in our food processing labs.
We're missing the
opportunity to put
different forms of
information into our products.
So I've got bacterial
metabolite microbial
intelligent information
into this product,
but we also have light
information by putting it in--
our fermentation rooms are
lined with tourmaline tile,
so it's giving off a lot of
far infrared natural radiation
energies that the
microbes really like.
We've got magnetics, and
then the water that we use
is completely structured.
I use this water
from a company called
Ophora out of Santa Barbara.
Amazing structure.
>>REGINA: So what's
the name of it again?
I'm writing it down.
>>ROM: Ophora, O-P-H-O-R-A.
>>REGINA: And so you're
using that in the process.
OK.
>>ROM: Yeah, it's
hyperoxygenated.
It's got about 40 parts
per million oxygen.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: And then
on top of that, I
take that water and I put a
water crystal that we harvest
from under Antarctica, under
the Russian side of Antarctica,
and it crystallizes into
what Gerald Pollack calls
a fourth phase of water.
So we've analyzed
this water crystal
that we've come in our water.
We call it life
force energy water.
I don't know if it's
life force energy water,
but it's crystallized, and
the microbes have that.
So we have water information,
we have light information,
we have magnetic information,
we have electrical information,
and that's all encoded inside
these bacterial metabolites.
So when I ferment
this turmeric, now
when I harvest this
fermentation, wow,
it's amazing.
And every day we're
doing that even
with our marine phytoplankton,
which is what I'm drinking now.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: So the
marine phytoplankton
and other blue-green
algaes I'm using,
I'm now experimenting
with blue-green algaes
from Klamath Lake called
A-floss that in some studies,
it increases stem cells.
And I'm using organic
spirulina and marine chlorella
and nannochloropsis
from different farms
that are growing these things.
But after they grow, I'm taking
them, I'm fermenting them,
and then I'm sticking
them back in the ocean
so they can gather
all the magnetics
and the healing
frequencies from the ocean.
They're in closed vesicles,
but then they're fermenting--
>>REGINA: This is so exciting.
You are crazy!
I love it.
>>ROM: I mean, we
have caves, too.
We're putting them in caves
in Kauai in the ocean,
so we got to go in there.
And one time I saw
this turtle starting
to dig in because he saw all
this marine phytoplankton,
and that's their food.
So the turtle was just
like, aah, couldn't get it.
But it's getting the
nutritional energy
from geodesic
nutritional energy,
which is magnetic fields.
And so when you're taking this
stuff and after it's fermented
and then I dehydrate it, and
after you take this stuff,
it's just so alive.
So I'm going to give you a
bottle of this to take home.
>>REGINA: I can't
wait to try it.
Oh my god.
No, this is just exciting
hearing about it,
no less what my
cells might feel.
>>ROM: We're getting
athletes, we're
getting these
personal trainers that
can't believe how fantastic our
marine phytoplankton mix is.
They said, what's in this stuff?
Because it just energizes me.
And marine phytoplankton
and blue-green algae
has this compound
called DHA, and DHA
is like a major component
of our cell membranes,
especially in our brain.
>>REGINA: OK, so
thank you for that,
and thank you for
everything you're doing.
I mean, you'll go to
any length to make
the most perfect nutrient.
I mean, I've known you
for a number of years now,
and I love what you
do because you're just
constantly expanding and
growing and adding onto.
And I think what's happened
with a lot of people,
I hear this a lot now, that
we're almost afraid to eat.
It's like you eat food,
your belly just swells up,
and you think, what the
heck, what was that?
It's not even gluten.
And it's like our bodies
are almost becoming allergic
to the food around us, and
this is a really big cycle
that has to be transformed.
And is it that food is really
basically just become filler?
Or is the food, like we said
before, I think a lot of it's
devitalizing us and kind
of slowly killing us.
So how do you go about
your food sources?
I mean, if you add these
wonderful super nutrients
and fermented super nutrients
back in, first of all,
you're giving yourself,
I assume, a little bump,
a little something to
grow toward, but what
about the rest of it?
>>ROM: Right.
So this is an issue
that I've been
grappling with for the
last five, six years.
I said, how would
one differentiate
one food versus another food?
Let's say this food
is grown organically,
and let's say this food was
grown in a commercial farm.
>>REGINA: Let's
start with organics.
Assume everyone watching,
and ourselves included,
are committed to organics.
But then what?
>>ROM: But the thing is,
my issue with something
being labeled organic
and being certified
organic is, how do you really
know whether that is giving you
nutrition or not?
Because organic food
means food that we
used to create 100 years ago.
>>REGINA: It just means
theoretically they
haven't piled on all the
pesticides, herbicides,
insecticides, theoretically.
>>ROM: Theoretically, but a
food can be called organic
and be sprayed with Roundup
just before harvesting.
Did you know that?
>>REGINA: No.
>>ROM: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's
so depressing.
>>ROM: Because Roundup is
not considered any pesticide
or herbicide, it's actually
considered a drying agent.
>>REGINA: Glycol phosphates,
what do they do to us?
>>ROM: Oh god.
>>REGINA: I didn't know that.
>>ROM: Here's another
thing about where
we're not connected with nature
and we're giving ourselves
the wrong kind of information.
God made perfect beings,
God made perfect plants.
And then in the 1980s,
because of our convenience,
we're saying, you know what, our
herbicides and our pesticides
aren't working for
this corn anymore,
wouldn't it be
great if we encoded
a gene inside the corn
that would kill off
these different herbs?
>>REGINA: Monsanto.
>>ROM: So we
decided to play God.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: Which is all fine.
We just need to know
and not delude ourselves
that we are God right now.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's look
at the effect just of that one
move, glycol phosphates
and so forth.
>>ROM: Glycol phosphates
are finding that, A,
that there are
cases now being sent
against Monsanto to the
point of billions of dollars.
>>REGINA: Oh yeah, cancer.
>>ROM: Because of cancer.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ROM: Yeah, and Monsanto had to
file for basically bankruptcy,
but they got bought by Bayer,
which is a big pharmaceutical
company thinking that--
and why did Bayer buy Monsanto?
>>REGINA: Why did they?
>>ROM: Well,
because they thought
it was in their best interest.
Even with all the lawsuits
going on with Monsanto,
they thought that
Monsanto was going
in the direction good enough
to diversify their portfolio
of where they were going.
They didn't think that just
by going for human and animal
pharmaceuticals was enough.
They wanted to go into
agricultural biotechnology.
So it's their business decision.
But I'm telling you, there's
a lot of intelligence going on
in the pharmaceutical industry.
And one of these days, we're
going to figure all this stuff
out, right?
This is just a bump in the road
because this is just feedback.
And one thing
about human beings,
every time we get
negative feedback,
we figure out how
to get it better.
We just can't delude ourselves
that this is the answer.
That's my only issue.
>>REGINA: I know, and it just
keeps getting more extreme.
>>ROM: And the glycol
phosphate, it's
making our microbiomes
more extreme
because it's starting
these micro fungi that
are causing people to have a
domino effect, and one of them
is weight gain.
The reason why we're finding
it so hard to lose weight
is because the accumulation
of all the herbicides
and the pesticides and
the chemicals and now
GMOs into our body.
And now the water
that we're drinking,
if we're drinking city
tap water, and some
of the plastic
water bottles have
phthalates in the plastic,
especially when those water
bottles are exposed to sun.
And then we have all
these pharmaceuticals,
micro pharmaceuticals,
in our water.
So our body is just fighting
with all these things,
and the result is weight gain.
For example, the two
most prescribed drugs,
class of drugs, are what?
Anti-anxiety and the statins,
two most prescribed drugs.
What's their major side effect?
Weight gain, right?
So almost 90% of the population
has one of the two drugs.
>>REGINA: And even
filtration systems
don't get these drugs out?
>>ROM: They don't get the
drugs out because the water,
when the water is purified,
actually takes on the frequency
of anything that's--
>>REGINA: That's true.
Homeopathically, it
would still be true.
>>ROM: Right.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
It's already just taking
in that information.
>>ROM: So you need to
restructure and get rid
of all the frequencies
and then restructure
with additional frequencies.
So to come around, when we're
looking at food, I said,
wouldn't it be great to
be able to measure a food
and make sure that it has the
right kind of information,
informational
compounds or metabolics
in there, to make us get to
the optimum form of wellness?
Which for lack of a better
term, I'm calling longevity.
So if something is allowing
us to take the track,
the train track
to longevity, then
we don't have to worry
about anything else
because it'll self-direct,
self-heal, and self-manage
itself.
We don't have to worry
about that stuff.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>ROM: And I'm calling
these compounds,
like curcumin is a
longevity compound,
antioxidants is a
anything that increases
our lifespan is
a longevity compound.
Resveratrol increases
our lifespan.
It is a longevity compound.
So collectively, we're calling
these longevity compounds
longevicans.
And I've started a
company called Longevican
specifically to
measure these compounds
in the different foods.
So I would like to start an
open source project where people
can start taking
whatever supplements,
whatever foods, and
start identifying
the longevicans in each food.
So if you've got
longevicans that
are pointed for inflammation,
there's certain longevicans,
like curcumin is
good for longevity,
but then there are
certain longevicans
that are good for immunity,
like the longevicans coming out
of olive leaf extracts.
Oleuropeins are really good
for optimizing your T-cells
and B-cells.
And you've got longevicans
for our mental and emotional
states.
For example, like ginsengs,
it has ginsenosides, right?
So you measure
these longevicans,
and these are positive scores.
But then you also measure the
toxins that are really bad.
Obviously, the heavy metals--
arsenic, lead,
cadmium, mercury--
are the big four.
And then you measure the
herbicides and the pesticides.
One thing good about the
cannabis and the CBD industry,
they're making sure that these
supplements are herbicide
and pesticide and toxin free.
It's a very responsible industry
that's happening right now,
and that should be done
for the whole community.
So with this open source
longevican profiling project,
we're asking people to
send these projects in,
and we can measure the
longevity, the longevican
levels, of these products.
So let's say that you do
have high inflammation
and you do have heart disease,
but your blood glucose is fine.
You'd want a food that
has a positive longevican
for inflammation and for
cardiovascular health,
but you don't need a food that's
really high in glucose health.
You don't need
bitter melon extract,
or you're not taking
that form in or anything.
So you can start
creating your own scores
through this kind of a
longevican profiling system.
>>REGINA: Well, but
what you're seeing here
is this is all
under development.
>>ROM: Yes.
>>REGINA: It's not there yet.
So let's talk about what
people can do here now.
Now there are a couple of things
that we haven't gotten to,
but we still have time.
One of them-- and you and I have
talked privately about this,
and it has to do with using
ozone water to take your food
to, if you're going to be
eating your organic fruits
or vegetables, take it
down to a neutral position
when it comes to bacteria
and also extending the shelf
life of your food in doing so.
So let's talk about that,
because they're saying,
wait a minute, but you said
we're made of bacteria,
we should be feeding
ourselves healthy bacteria,
and then you're
saying, no, we should
kill the bacteria on the surface
of our vegetables that come in.
So let's talk about that.
>>ROM: Well, what
I'd like to focus on
is getting our foods back
to neutral as possible
and looking at foods
that have always
had a connection to nature.
Like in Bitcoin
terms, I'm calling it
a proof of life, right?
So if your product has proof
of life and you can see that
conveyance all the way
down to from the time
that it was planted.
Obviously, if one plants
their own plants in the garden
and you made your own compost,
you planted your own plants,
you know exactly how
it's grown, you're
not going to need to wash
it with ozone to kill off
all the microbes because
all your microbes are
good because you
know what's in them.
>>REGINA: But when you're buying
things from the grocery store.
>>ROM: I would
assume that they're--
>>REGINA: Even organic.
>>ROM: Yeah, because a lot
of the food that we have,
believe it or not, has
fecal matter on the food,
and we want to take
all that stuff out.
I'm a proponent of
microbes, but that's
going a little bit too far.
>>REGINA: So you take
ozone water in a tub?
Do you just fill a tub of it?
>>ROM: We have these water
ozonators that we have.
They're pretty inexpensive.
And you flip it on,
and it takes air
and it converts it to ozone.
You put this ozone
bubbler in your water,
and then you just bubble
your fruits and vegetables
and you clean your
fruits and vegetables.
Instead of getting
a chemical cleaner,
you bubble it in ozone,
and then, pfhew--
>>REGINA: No, that makes perfect
sense because that's what's
making it slimy on the outside.
In addition, if you store it
in glass instead of plastics,
you can really give weeks to
a zucchini or strawberries,
and they'll stay in
perfect condition.
>>ROM: These glass containers
that are rectangular and then
you just kind of
punch them, yeah, we
can store zucchinis
and cucumbers.
>>REGINA: I've used
glass for years,
and it's amazing how
long stuff lasts.
>>ROM: Yeah.
So if you ozonate
it, you clean it up.
But I would say that after
you clean something up--
and pasteurization is another
way to clean something up.
You can actually heat it.
>>REGINA: Like a flash.
>>ROM: Flash heat.
Yeah, but you don't want to
heat it to like 200 degrees.
You want to heat it to like 160.
So if you have a
temperature gun and you
have a big pot of water, if
you don't have an ozonator,
put a big pot of water
and you can heat it.
>>REGINA: Just dump it in
quickly for just a little bit,
a few seconds, pull it out.
>>ROM: Pull it out.
And then you can also
use hydrogen peroxide.
That's another way of
killing off all the microbes.
But then after you
do that, you want
to fill it with good microbes.
You want to inoculate
it with good microbes
because inoculation
after sterilization
means that the new team
that's on the microbes,
it's setting up their own
defensive system there,
and it prevents all the microbes
to come in and set up shop.
So I like calling it like empty
out the Walmart parking right.
You know how Walmart allows RVs?
I mean, it's an amazing company.
They'll let you sleep
overnight in their parking lot.
Well, in our microbes
in our bodies,
bacterias are like cars, but
the yeasts are kind of like RVs
and the parasites are
like the semi trucks
and the viruses are
like motorcycles, right?
And in a Walmart
parking lot, you
get all kinds of stuff in there.
But you want to put
in your good microbes,
and you want to get
them all set up there.
>>REGINA: So how do you put the
good microbes in after you've
cleaned and neutralized?
>>ROM: Hey, that's a way
for me to plug our product.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ROM: ProLife.
>>REGINA: ProLife?
OK.
>>ROM: We have a
probiotic product.
We have about 19 essential
strains from longevity regions
around the world, and
it's a live probiotic
that we culture in
our fermentation room.
And again, this has
magnetic energy,
it has electrical
energy, pulsing energy.
It's got light energies into it.
So these microbes
are ready to go.
And when you put them in a
solution of coconut water,
they all come to life.
And you can literally get
a bunch of coconut water,
and if you don't have coconut
water, just have regular water,
put a little bit
of honey in there,
and then put our
ProLife in there,
and then soak your
vegetables in there.
>>REGINA: And now they still
have the same longevity?
>>ROM: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: Those microbes
aren't going to break it down?
>>ROM: No, those microbes
don't break it down.
The microbes that
break things down
are called saprophytic microbes.
So we have two
kinds of microbes.
We have breakdown microbes
called saprophytic microbes,
and then we have microbes
that actually make life that
are called biophytic microbes.
These are all
biophytic microbes.
The whole circle of "Lion
King" life, the circle of life
is when things go to spirit
and they become a dead body,
whether it be a plant
or a human or an animal,
things break it down,
and those are usually
the saprophytic microbes.
Mushrooms are the best
saprophytic microbes for fungi.
It has things that break things
down to its component parts.
But then those component parts
are glucose, carbon, nitrogen,
and potassium, and
whatnot, but they
have to get built up again
in the building blocks.
>>REGINA: Well, a lot of
people take mushroom extracts.
What is that doing?
>>ROM: Well, the extracts
are not living anymore,
so the extracts are actually
the stressors in our body.
Cordyceps has an extract called
Cs-4, and it gives people a ton
of energy, right?
But the Cs-4 is an actual
stressor in our body to get
your body to produce more
energy thinking that it's kind--
>>REGINA: Ah, I see, I see.
>>ROM: This is called the
concept of micro hormesis.
>>REGINA: Yes, what we were
talking about to start with.
Another thing you talk
about is fermentation
because you've already mentioned
the fermentation in the process
of doing what you do.
But now everybody's
running out and buying
sauerkraut of all kinds.
>>ROM: I would suggest
that people still run out
and buy sauerkraut,
but you don't really
know the microbes that
are in the sauerkraut.
And even if they
tell you, you don't
know how they were made, right?
And again, just because you
have x number of people,
again, let's call it an
army, just because you
have 1,000 raw army
recruits and say, hey, we
have these microbes
in our product,
they could be raw army recruits.
But for us, we train our
microbes into special forces,
so we only need a few microbes
to exert a lot of effect
because they have a lot
of intelligence, you know?
So while the sauerkrauts
and all the fermented foods
out there are really
great, it would
be better if you had the
intelligent microbes.
And we gather our
intelligence to say, OK,
where are the microbes
of most intelligence?
Well, we think the microbes
have the most intelligence where
people live the longest,
called longevity zones.
So for the last 12 years,
we've been traveling
these longevity zones--
Icaria, Greece, Nicoya Peninsula
in Costa Rica, Okinawa, Japan,
places in Russia, where
people live to a long time--
and I gather microbes.
After you neutralize all
of the inherent microbes,
you want to put new
microbes in your vegetables.
And whether you soak in them
or whether you chop them up
and you let them
ferment, fermenting
them would be better.
So the project that we're
working on now with our food
project is we're about to
embark on a new project
to create prepared dehydrated
foods that people can just
put in their smoothies
and give to kids
and make mashed
potatoes, but it's all
going to be dehydrated.
But before then, we're
going to ferment everything
with all these really
live intelligent microbes.
>>REGINA: I swear
to God it sounds
like you're from the future.
You've dropped in
to kind of start
setting the templates
for the way forward.
But then again,
time is non-linear,
so you're here now,
which is fabulous.
So all of these things,
like this product
you're talking about, how
long before these things
are actually made
available to we humans?
>>ROM: The longevican powders
are probably coming in
within the next year or so.
We've already got the farms.
We're setting up the
dehydration facilities.
But again, our dehydration
facilities, we're
putting CO2 tanks,
hydrogen tanks,
and we're putting
magnetics in there.
We're lining everything
with tourmaline.
Everything just takes time.
But the main thing
is, we're going
to be measuring every single one
of our products in accordance
to how many
longevicans they have.
And then we're going to
be able to categorize
our longevicans, longevicans
for inflammation,
for immunity, or whatnot.
And it's all based on I have
a four-year-old daughter
and she has friends,
and I've been
working with these children
now for the past three years.
We're just not coming out
with this out of the blue.
I've been testing these theories
for the last three years.
And to be able to come up with
a fermented mashed potato that
still tastes sweet, but
instead of using sugar,
we use a little
bit of raw honey,
but we use chicory inulin,
which is a prebiotic,
but it tastes sweet.
Then we start growing little
bits of microbes in there,
and we've given them to
these kids in Hawaii.
These parents are
saying, you know,
my child that was a D-plus
average in sixth grade,
he's in ninth grade now,
he's got a B-minus average.
>>REGINA: Love it.
>>ROM: I mean, for a lot of
people, a D-plus to a B-minus
still isn't great,
but for me, it's huge.
>>REGINA: That's a huge leap.
I love it.
Well, as always, we
could go on for probably
another hour easily
on all of this,
and I just appreciate
what you've
brought to our attention.
So really for the
average person,
we can look to try to go as
organically as we can, then
try to wash all of the
unfavorable microbes off
of our food.
>>ROM: Also, connection to
nature is really important.
>>REGINA: And connection
to nature hugely.
>>ROM: So if you can buy
it from a local farm,
something made with love.
Any time something is
disconnected, made in a factory
or being put with
pesticides, you're just--
>>REGINA: Know your source
of your food if you can.
And if you eat beef, get
locally raised grass-fed beef.
If you eat vegetables,
get your local vegetables
at the farmer's market or from
your neighbor as best we can.
And then we can always
do some extracts,
like turmeric, olive leaf
extract you were talking about,
some of these ginseng.
We can do these
things for ourselves.
>>ROM: Yes.
>>REGINA: Just keep it clean
and do clean water until
your technology
starts to becoming--
>>ROM: Ophora water
is amazing water.
>>REGINA: Ophora water.
OK, good.
On that, I think we're
over now out of time.
So, Compton, thank you
so much for bringing
all your light and your
knowledge to us once again.
>>ROM: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Compton's work can
be found at ascendedhealth.com.
I'm personally
really psyched to see
what's going to happen with
these super fermented compounds
in the future.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]